Okay, guys, welcome to lecture 30.
In this lecture we'll be
learning how to merge on index.
So a previous lecture we saw merging and
how we use columns to do that, and keys.
Now we're gonna use indexes
to do that same thing.
So, import the usual, pandas as pd.
From pandas, import
Series and DataFrame,
and import numpy as np.
Okay, so let's go ahead and
make two DataFrames.
I'll make a DataFrame called df_left.
And we'll construct it using a dictionary.
So I'll set a column to be called key.
And I'll pass a list, so
let's just go with X,
Y, Z, then X, Y.
All right, and then,
next column we'll say it's, whoops.
We'll call it data.
Sorry, one of my keys was sticking.
Okay, we'll call it data.
And we'll pass a list there as well.
Actually we won't,
we'll just call it a range.
We'll say we want 5 points.
That's DataFrame left.
Let's go ahead and
take a look at what that looks like.
All right, there we have a key column,
X Y Z X Y, our data column.
And then let's make a DataFrame right,
df_right.
Construct it in a similar manner.
We'll say.
We'll pass the dictionary.
Let's call one column group_data,
and it'll be a list, just 10 and
20 will be the values.
And that's it actually,
and then we'll give
it an index, and
the index will be X and Y.
So notice how in this first part for
the DataFrame, I have my dictionary and
then the second part I labeled my index.
And then let's take a quick
look at what that looks like.
So I have X and Y index, and then I have
my group_data, which is just 10 and 20.
So, we'll merge, and we'll use the key for
the left DataFrame, and
then the index for the right.
So let me show you what I'm talking about.
pd.merge, we'll put in the left DataFrame
we wanna merge with the right DataFrame.
And now I can pass left_on,
and we'll say key.
So the left DataFrame will merge on the
key, and then I'll say right_index=True.
So let's go ahead and
take a look at what happens there.
So if you noticed, we were able to use
the index for the right and the key for
the left DataFrame.
So the key for left DataFrame,
X, Y, Z, X, Y.
We use that in combination with
the data from this group data.
So now every X in group data was a 10.
So the keys from the left DataFrame,
X, Y, Z, X, Y,
since there was two Xs and two Ys,
in the merging we have two Xs and two Ys.
But we're using the group data,
10, 10, 20, 20.
And then we also have the data
column from our left DataFrame.
So if you want, you can go ahead and
mess around with different left_ons and
with the right_index True and False.
See if you can predict
the DataFrames that come out, and
that way you'll know if
you understood it or not.
Let's try a little something different.
So, how about using
a hierarchy index with merging?
So I'll make another DataFrame.
I'll call it df_left_hr cuz it's
gonna have an index hierarchy.
I'll construct it using DataFrame.
And let's go ahead and
make a dictionary, we'll call this key1.
And I'll use city values in this case,
or city initials I should say.
SF, SF and
then we'll have the last two be LA, LA.
And the next entry in that
dictionary will be key2.
We'll leave values,
how about 10, 20, 20, 30?
And we'll keep data_set and
this column will just say np.arrange5,
and I'm gonna add a point here to let it
know that it's a floating point number.
And looks like I forgot a comma here and
a comma there.
All right, excellent.
Let's make sure that it was
all inputted correctly.
I accidentally put one extra r.
And, whoops, what did I mess up?
Arrays must be all the same length.
Do I have them all the same length?
Let's see, key1 was 5, key2,
I accidentally have it,
so let me add another number there,
so now that should be 5 points.
Okay, and
let's just take a look at what we got.
Nice.
So our data set is just 0 through 4,
so 5 points there.
key1 are the cities we put in,
key2 are those numbers we put in 10,
20, 30, 20, 30.
Now let's make another DataFrame.
We'll call it df_right_hr.
This DataFrame,
I'm just gonna say, np.arange(10).
I'm gonna reshape that into
a matrix as we've done in the past.
I'll make it a 5 by 2.
So those will be my data points.
Then I'll set up my index.
My index is gonna be, so
I'm gonna have an index hierarchy here.
So that means I'm gonna pass
a list of lists, so, I'll have LA,
Whoops, not Alabama,
LA, SF, SF, SF.
And then, since this is an index
hierarchy, we'll make another one,
and we'll call it,
let's just have it be some numbers,
20, 10, 10, 10, 20.
And, since we have our index,
we need to make some columns.
And we should have the columns equal to,
I'm just
gonna call them col1, and then col2.
And let me put an underscore so
it's a little more readable.
Okay, let me just look over this to
make sure we wrote it all in right.
Our data is np.arange(10).reshape(5,2).
And then we have our index,
which is two lists, LA, LA, SF, SF, SF.
And then we have 20, 10, 10, 10, 20.
And then we have our columns.
So, let's see if we got that right.
Looks like I should have
had a apostrophe there.
Okay, now let's try it out.
Okay, cool.
And let's check out the DataFrame.
All right, so
we have a index hierarchy here.
So we have the cities and
then their separate values.
And then our two data sets of column 1,
column 2, with the arranged numbers 0, 1,
2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9,
from np.arange(10).reshape(5,2).
Okie dokie.
So, we can merge the left by using
keys and the right by its index again.
So, let's go ahead and see what that looks
like when we do it with index hierarchy.
So we have df_left_hr and
then the DataFrame on the right
which call hr as well.
I'll say merge to left_on key1, key2.
And then the right_index we'll say True so
it merges the right by its index.
Let's go ahead and see what we got.
Okay, so if we take a quick gander at that
first left DataFrame,
we have our data set, and then key1, key2.
And then on the right we had LA,
SF, its sub index,
the 10s and 20s, and then the two columns.
So, now when we merge them we have our
dataset values merged by the key1 and
key2, and then the right_index.
So it kept this SF,
LA and the 10s and 20s.
Nice.
So our data is now merged and formatted.
If you don't want to put in so
many arguments, Pandas does have
another method of joining stuff,
or merging stuff I should say.
And you can just do that
by using the method, join.
So join is what we are actually
gonna be using most of the time.
So let's go ahead and take a look at those
original DataFrames, df_left and df_right.
So df_left was 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, the key was
X, Y, Z, X, Y, df_right was X, Y, 10, 20.
And when you said, left join it with the
right, you got the data and keys lined up.
But group data,
since it didn't line up with any of
the indexes, it left it as straight Nulls.
And you can pass the same arguments
through join as we were doing through
merge, to get specific columns or
indexes that you want.
Okay, so we'll probably be
using join more than merge in
most of the lectures in this course.
But it's important to know how merge works
in order to understand how join works.
So go ahead and mess around with
inputting different keys and indexes.
Right index set to false or
choose different keys to merge on.
Just to make sure you get
a good understanding of
what exactly is being merged and
how it's being merged.
So that's how you merge on index.
Next up, we'll learn about
the concatenate function.
So I'll go ahead and
end this lecture here,
and I'll see you at the next lecture.